# networking-wireguard
Repo to integrate wireguard tunnels as a Neutron ML2 Driver


## Devstack Usage

Include this in your devstack local.conf file:

```
[[local|localrc]]
enable_plugin networking-wireguard https://github.com/ChameleonCloud/networking-wireguard.git main
```



## Sample local.conf for testing

```
[[local|localrc]]
ADMIN_PASSWORD=<password>
DATABASE_PASSWORD=$ADMIN_PASSWORD
RABBIT_PASSWORD=$ADMIN_PASSWORD
SERVICE_PASSWORD=$ADMIN_PASSWORD

HOST_IP=<IP for public interface>

# minimal config for neutron dev
disable_all_services
enable_service keystone mysql rabbit
enable_service q-svc q-l3 q-agt q-meta q-dhcp

enable_plugin networking-wireguard https://github.com/ChameleonCloud/networking-wireguard.git main

[[post-config|/$Q_PLUGIN_CONF_FILE]]

[wireguard]
WG_HUB_IP=$HOST_IP
```


## Architecture

This plugin runs in two components, a mechanism driver on the neutron-server instance, and a separate wireguard-agent that runs on the networking node. It may be the case that neutron-server and the wireguard-agent run on the same system.

The mechanism driver is responisble for validating data, updating the neutron database, and communicating with the agent via RPC. The agent actually executes the commands that change system networking state, e.g. creating namespaces, configuring interfaces, and so on.

## Expected Input

This plugin will act on `port_create`, `port_update`, `port_delete`, and `bind_port` actions.

The port object must have the following attributes set:
- binding:device_owner: channel:wireguard:hub
- binding:vif_type: wireguard
- binding:vif_details:
  - wg_pubkey: "public_key" of peer (optional)
  - wg_endpoint: "ip_address:port" of peer (optional)

or

- binding:device_owner: channel:wireguard:spoke
- binding:vif_type: wireguard
- binding:vif_details:
  - wg_pubkey: "public_key" of hub port (mandatory)
  - wg_endpoint: "ip_address:port" of hub port (mandatory)


## Testing

The `.vscode` folder includes debugger configurations. After brining up devstack via `../devstack/stack.sh`, the debuggers should be usable.

Neutron: q-svc will run the neutron-server process in the debugger.
Make sure you run `systemctl stop devstack@q-svc.service` before launching the debugger.

networking-wireguard-agent will run the wireguard agent in the debugger.
make sure you kill the existing process before running the debugger.

The script `./devstack/testcopy.sh` will run `openstack port create` with suitable arguments, print the port info, then run `openstack port delete` to clean up.


## Development notes

Current status is that all methods in the mechanism driver are called as expected. After running port_create, the port correctly transitions from `vif_type: unbound` to `vif_type: wireguard`. I believe that setting it beforehand will prevent openvswitch from acting on it, but I'm not sure.

All of the implementation methods for creating interfaces, saving config files, and so on, are in `networking_wireguard/ml2/agent/wg.py`
You can see examples of how they were used in the commented out portions of `networking_wireguard/ml2/mech_driver/driver.py`

As a "quick and dirty" fix, these methods could be called directly from the mechanism driver, leaving the agent as essentially a "noop" to keep neutron happy.
The risk is that even the "postcommit" methods shouldn't be called in a way that blocks, or the neutron-server can become unresponsive.

There are notification topics present for `port-update`, `port-delete`, `binding-activate`, and `binding-deactivate`, but for some reason only the `port-delete` RPC reaches the agent.

The next debugging step would be to capture the emitted RPC messages, to verify what is being sent / received, and whether it's an issue with agent topic registration, or the correct event not being sent in the first place.

## Design Goals

### ML2

On port create
Validate the channel properties:
In the case of a "spoke" port, a public key must be provided. The private key for the tunnel should not be generated by Neutron, nor should Neutron ever know it.
In the case of a "spoke" port, an "endpoint" can optionally be defined; this should be a stable public host/port pair that resolves to the Wireguard tunnel on the device end. This is NOT required and any device end behind a NAT will not have a stable endpoint.

When creating a hub port:
Create a new Wireguard interface (named after the port using the aforementioned convention) in the root network namespace on the Neutron node, and then move it to a tenant-specific network namespace (named like tun<project_id>). If no such namespace exists yet, create it before moving the Wireguard interface. Creating the interface in the root namespace simplifies the layer-2 configuration and importantly should obviate the need to deal with OVS or similar.
Randomly generated a new private key and assign to the interface.
Pick a free port in the 51820..52820 range for the listen port and assign to the interface.
Update the port vif_details with the public key.
Update the port vif_details with the endpoint of the tunnel, which should be the public address of the Neutron node combined with the chosen port.
The device public key and IP address provided by the user are added as a peer, with the device IP being in the AllowedIPs list.
Save the Wireguard configuration to the channel configuration repo.
Note we do not bring up the interface here!

When creating a spoke port:
Read the public_key, endpoint, and IP of the hub port. Store them on the binding vif_details in a "peers" list.

On port update
When updating a hub port:
Synchronize the list of peers to the Wireguard configuration and save the updated configuration to the channel configuration repo.
When updating a spoke port:
No changes needed.

On port delete
When deleting a hub port:
Delete the Wireguard interface associated with the port, and delete the configuration stored in the configuration repo.
When deleting a spoke port:
No changes needed.


### L3

When adding a port to a router
If the port is a hub port for a Wireguard tunnel, move the Wireguard interface to the router's network namespace instead of creating a new veth pair and assigning an IP address. Bring up the tunnel interface.

When removing a port from a router
If the port is a hub port, move the Wireguard interface back to the default namespace and bring down the tunnel interface.
